---
highlight: false
path: got-an-idea-now-what
title: Got an idea, now what?
categories:
  - product
author: luis-zamith
date: 2020-06-29
intro: Having an idea for a digital product might be the start of something
  beautiful, but it has to be nourished
tags:
  - development
---

First of all let me say right out of the gate that ideas are overrated. Having a
lot of ideas is good, having good ideas is even better, but they're not even
half of story, which is why I always find it funny when people want me to sign
an NDA before sharing their idea. The likelihood of anyone trying to steal
your idea is very low, the likelihood of someone trying to steal your idea and
then doing something useful with it is even lower. All of this to say that the
hard work happens after you've had the idea, not before!

"It's not the idea, it's about its execution" is already a cliche at this point
and even though I mostly agree with it, I think it can be misunderstood. What it
is saying is that good execution is paramount if you are to make it, it is not
saying that the idea does not matter, it is also not saying that you should jump
right into execution. The latter being what we engineers tend to do.

## Ideas matter

Ideas matter, because you've got to start somewhere. However, they are most akin
to a diamond in the rough, only after you cut and polish it do you know if
you've got a precious gem or little more than a rock. Moreover, cutting an
polishing is a hard process, which may take years to learn how to do right. A
lot can be done with simple common sense, especially if you are a possible
customer for your product, but for most people there's a limit to how much you
can take out of that.

"So now what?", you say, "I have this great idea that I want to build. What
should I do?"

## Validating them matters more

After you have your great idea and think it through for a few days, it's time to
see how it fares against the real world. There are multiple ways that you can do
this, but at this point very few will be better than interviewing people that
match your target (people in general is a close second). You can more or less
formally define personas, the gist of it being that you imagine a person, with
all of its traits, that would be a client for your soon to be product. Then, as
you go through the nuances of your idea, see if it matches the needs of that
persona. Would they buy it? Would they use it? Be very critical here.

Even with as little as 5 interviews you should have gathered tons of
information. That information should allow you to more clearly understand if you
have a good or not so good idea, as well as where it needs a little bit of cut
and polish to become better.

Now, there's a lot of different types of interviews and a lot of things to
consider when preparing for them, especially if it's your first time doing this.
You'll have a natural tendency to tell them about your idea and ask for their
approval, "Would you like X?", "Isn't Y a pain right now?" or even "Would you
pay for Z?". These are all terrible questions. You're putting the interviewee
in a position in which they will say what you want to hear. Instead, don't talk
about your idea, don't even mention you have one, at this point all you care
about is understanding if it makes sense. Ask them about what they feel about a
topic, how have they solved in the past, have they tried to fix it?

## Want vs Need

If you follow those rules and are true and honest about reading the results, you
should be able to understand a key question in validating any idea. Is this a
want or need, aka is this a vitamin or an aspirin? The answer to this question
will dictate a lot of things. If it's a want/vitamin it'll be a harder sell with
a smaller market, no one really needs it, it's something they might buy on a
whim, or if for some reason they happen to have an issue and disposable cash at
the same time, but you'll be on thin ice most of the time (named brand can be
seen as a caveat to this, since you could get it cheaper, but I'd argue people
buy it for a need of social acceptance and acknowledgement, be it to show off or
because it's part of cause they believe in).

Ideally you want to be in the realm of what people need. That's the aspirin,
that's what people will pay good money for, even when they might not have that
much disposable cash, and for good reason, because it'll be a priority for them.

## Problem vs Solution

On the same spectrum of want vs need there's also a very important concept to
keep in mind when validating an idea. Is there a problem here, or only a
solution? Time and time again you'll talk to people with brilliant ideas of how
they'll build something, only to realise that even though it sounds good, what
they have is a solution to a problem that doesn't exist.

At this stage, the solution is secondary. You can always pivot, change your
solution to something slightly (or not so slightly) different, as long as there
is a real problem behind it.

There are many ways to validate this as well, and interviews can always work,
but in my experience at this point what you should be doing is running a design
sprint. Incredibly so, a design sprint has very little to do with what you'd
call design and very much to do with design thinking. It will help shape how you
think. There's a multitude of resources online about them, but their a bit
scattered, in my opinion, also most resources will focus more on the structure
of the sprint as opposed to how it should be ran and what you should be looking
for while running it.

## Conclusion

Having the idea is only the tip of iceberg, there's a lot more to be done before
you can confidently go to implement a possible solution. There are many options
to validate your idea, understading which to employ when, and how to employ them
requires a lot of experience. If you can pair with someone that has done this
validating successfully in the past, do it, but most people can't, so inform
yourself the best you can and try anyway.
