---
id: 141
path: /posts/141-summer-camp-2018/
title: "Subvisual's Summer Camp"
author: helena-muniz
date: 2018-06-01
tags:
  - community
intro: "At Subvisual, everyday is a day to learn something new. Everyday is an intense experience. Everyday is a day for exploring a new topic, a new subject, a new idea."
---

At Subvisual, everyday is a day to learn something new. Everyday is an intense experience. Everyday is a day for exploring a new topic, a new subject, a new idea. Therefore, and because we believe in giving back by sharing, we are announcing the return of our Summer Camp!

### Program

The Summer Camp will start on the 16th of July. You will be with us for 10 straight weeks, during which you’ll improve your skills with our mighty mentors. We are prepared to answer your most curious and intricate questions and help you master the art of craftsmanship. You will meet and talk with all kinds of technology lovers. You will learn and share with us.

We want to provide a unique experience for our campers. The Camp will take place in our office, in Braga, Portugal. It’s important that you feel engaged with our energy and dynamic in a place where anything can happen.

We believe that technology and knowledge should be accessible to anyone, of any social or economic class. We don’t want you to lose this opportunity for financial reasons. During the Summer Camp, we will support all food and transportation expenses you need. If you need extra financial support, reach out to us so we can try to find solutions for your case.

### An opportunity for you

We are looking for newly graduates or college students who are keen to learning fast and want to acquire knowledge. We believe the best learning tools are practice and experience. You will work on real projects with meaningful impact. You will develop new ideas and solutions with us, in our company and products. You are an ideal candidate if you’re autonomous, responsible and passionate about overcoming challenges. We have openings for product management, design and development internships.

### How to apply

To apply you simply need to answer some questions about yourself in [this form](https://subvisual.typeform.com/to/RR1Dqm). We will reach out to you through the email you provide us and give you further instructions so we can meet you and determine if you are a good fit for our program. Applications are open until the 24th of June.

Your ideas and insights can make an impact here. You can make an impact. Don’t forget to apply and we will talk soon!

Feel free to reach us out via [our email](mailto:contact@subvisual.co)
