---
highlight: false
path: dear-future-summer-camper
title: Dear Future Summer Camper...
categories:
  - academy
author: summer-campers-2020
date: 2021-05-27
seoImage: ./meta.png
intro: >
  We asked our 2020 Summer Campers to write a letter about their experience with
  Subvisual and the Universe. Here's a first-person take on what to expect from
  the Subvisual Summer Camp and what you may learn throughout the experience.
tags:
  - community
---

Dear future Summer Camper,

The world of internship seeking is dark and full of terrors. In the midst of
dodgy offers and denied applications, there lies a cloud of uncertainty.
However, through perseverance, you made it: you managed to find the light and
are now taking your first steps into the wondrous world of the Summer Camp. 

Now, you may have a million questions racing through your head; don't worry:
We've been exactly where you are now and we've felt the exact same you are now
feeling. Feeling uncertain about what to expect from this experience is
something normal to feel, but we're here to assure you that all your fears are
in vain and that your hopes will be met a thousandfold.

Ten weeks seems like a lot of time; trust us, it won't be. Therefore, take as
much as you can, whenever you can. In the end, you are responsible for your own
experience, so remember to stay hungry for learning, and have fun doing it.

When we first got to the Universe we were pleased to meet a lot of joyful and
available people. Meeting them and the way they all presented themselves,
helped our overall experience since it made us feel way more relaxed and ready
to do our job.

We thought we would only be coding or designing, but that was not the case, and
we're thankful for that. First, we had to work towards the planning of the
product since this whole experience is for us to understand every stage a
product endures before reaching the client. Since this was intended to
replicate a real customer experience, it was interesting to see the difference
between university assignments and an actual company project. The
professionalism, the teamwork, the different fields of work applied to the same
project all conducted to a better product overall. 

In your summer camp journey, you'll be joining other equally hard-working
individuals like yourself. Not only that, but you'll also learn how to best
coordinate with them to make your team much stronger than the sum of its parts.

As we started working at full steam, we were communicating at all times to make
sure each of us was informed about the stage of the product and to also give
inputs. This was our best quality, teamwork. No one was left behind (nor anyone
slept on the job), leading to product success. This success was achieved after
hours of product planning, user testing, designing a roadmap, retrospective
sessions, and the development of the product.

People will be the essence of your experience, from the team members to the
users and product owner, everything will be about them and that's awesome
because your ultimate goal is to make someone's life better, be it with a
product, a compliment, or even some advice.

"Yes, that's nice, but you know that's not the reason I've sought an
internship.". We know, you want to get technical, the nitty-gritty,  to improve
at your craft. Between design sprints, developing roadmaps, and sessions about
best practices, you'll find plenty of challenging opportunities for you to
improve how good you are. Also, the summer camp mentors will always be there to
help you stay on the right track during the course of the experience. 

Now that you know what to expect, we'd like to share with you some of the most
important lessons we've learned throughout our Summer Camp experiences and that
we'd like for you to take in as well:


- **Try doing something before worrying if you can actually do it.** To be
  faced with something you have no idea how to tackle is part of the learning
  experience. Don't stress about it, take a deep breath and think objectively
  about it.

- **Sometimes, working more is working less. Know when to stop.** There will be
  times when it will be really hard to detach from work even after the workday
  has already come to an end. A pesky bug you've been after for the last 5
  hours, or the stress of an approaching deadline, whatever the reason might
  be, let yourself rest. Not only will you be sharper and more precise the next
  day, but you also won't be risking your health.

- **Imposter syndrome is as common as the people telling you you shouldn't
  worry about it.** You'll find people who you'll look to and think "I'll never
  be as good as them". These people feel the same in respect to others, it's
  really a never-ending spiral. Spend less time comparing yourself with others
  and more improving yourself.

- **Don't get too stuck-up with your ideas.** Not everything can be
  implemented, know when to fight and when to back down. There's never one way
  of doing something, work together, communicate and listen to what your
  teammates say. 

- **Enjoy every moment you have in the Universe.** Embrace the opportunity and
  make the best of it. Work hard, give 110%, make sure you have time to
  increase your network by getting to know the people, by joining outside work
  events, and random talks.

All in all, you'll find the summer camp an incredible experience to both grow
up professionally as well as an individual, where you are surrounded by
hard-working and inspiring people.

Best of luck,<br>
**Álvaro Bezerra, Gil Afonso, João Correia, João Santos**


