---
path: /146-subvisual-is-hiring-a-frontend-developer/
title: Subvisual is hiring a Front End Developer
author: roberto-machado
date: 2020-02-10
intro: >
  We’re now looking for someone who can help us grow even more. Adding another
  human being to this equation as a full-time member of our company is
  something that really excites us.
---

It has been more than three years since we hired our last developer, and I’m
not sure that we even know how long since we last put out a job opening!

As a company, we have evolved a lot in the last (almost) seven years. We
started as a Ruby on Rails Development shop, working with companies from all
over the world. Later we shifted to a Design and Development Consultancy firm
and, even more recently, to a Venture Studio that helps founders create global
companies. We are certainly proud of our past list of clients, from AT&T,
DoctorLink and Uphold, to helping in the development of exciting startups like
UTRUST or Coverflex.

Along the way, we organized events such as RubyConf Portugal, Creators School,
MirrorConf, several meetups, and other initiatives that forced us to grow
beyond our natural craft.

Turning Subvisual into a relevant company was accomplished by a fantastic group
of 12 people. Helped by a vast group of friends that we have gathered from
across the globe, to whom we will be forever grateful.

Internally, we fought hard to create a workplace in which everyone can feel
welcome and part of the team. We make sure that we live by our values, and walk
the talk. This can be something as simple as a weekly 30 minute catch up call,
where we share what is going on in our personal lives, or something lengthier
such as our retreat, where we spend 3 to 4 days together, rethinking the
company, what we do and where we want to go.

In terms of hard skills, we’ve always been a full-stack oriented company. In
our rapidly evolving environment, it was important for everyone to feel
comfortable working on any level of the system, whether that was a design tweak
on the UI or a performance issue in the back-end. We believe this horizontal
knowledge to be essential, as it helps us understand the overall project much
better, and allows us to communicate transparently with our clients.

Over time, however, we have grown not only as a company but as individuals. The
nature of the projects changed a lot, and each of us started to tune their
craft in a particular field.

Some of us focused on gaining expertise in building high-quality UIs for our
products. Others have worked tirelessly on the infrastructure side to make
those products more scalable and reliable. But our background as full-stack
developers has allowed us to excel in different areas, without ever losing
sight of the bigger picture.

We’re now looking for someone who can help us grow even more. Adding another
human being to this equation as a full-time member of our company is something
that really excites us.


## About you

There isn’t a checklist of requirements that you need to tick to work at
Subvisual. You don’t need proficiency with some technology, or a college
degree. We expect that you love what you do, respect the job, and work
sustainably.

For this role, the two things you need are knowledge in the field of UI
development, and the will to learn more, the latter being way more important
than the former. Having a Continuous Improvement mindset is crucial for us.

We set high expectations for ourselves, and we’ll set the same for you. As a
front-end developer, you are expected to collaborate with everyone. You are
expected to learn about animations, accessibility, and performance. And more
importantly, you are expected to contribute and take the lead in these
subjects. We want you to be passionate about the web and explore its
boundaries.

You are expected to be autonomous. We rely on you to manage yourself and help
manage others. You should be confortable interacting with clients directly. You
will have to ask as opposed to wait to be asked. You should be open to and give
clear feedback. We want you to take a stand and disagree, but also commit to
the team’s decision when agreements need to be reached. We value strong
opinions weakly held.

We want you to give back. It’s one of our core values. We want you to
participate in meetups, organize events, write blog posts. Are you not used to
that? No worries, a lot of us weren’t when we joined Subvisual. We are here to
help you get comfortable with sharing. All you need to bring to the table is
the will to do that.

You will have to be a mentor. Not only inside the team, but also the people
that might join us looking to get into this industry.


## Salary and Benefits

We don’t benchmark our pay. We pay honest salaries that we want to grow
continuously. We aren’t yet in a position to pay everyone San Francisco
salaries; we would love to. What we can offer is above the market salary, with
quarterly reviews.

We offer a set of Benefits at Subvisual focused on your well being, mostly
outside of work. We want you to live a sustainable life, where we respect your
individual values, but nudge you to be healthier. That includes a Gym
membership, health insurance, budget for books, opportunity to attend
conferences, and other events, physiotherapy, and a lot of good moments to
relax with the team as well as outside of the company.

We are remote-friendly, working towards becoming a Remote Team. We do still
have two offices, one in Portugal and another one in Boston, both of which we
will keep, but you are free to work from anywhere (within a reasonable timezone
difference). We subsidize coworking spaces or home offices, to provide you the
best possible environment to work, regardless of where you are. We will also
invest in your continuing education, on the professional or hobbyist level.

We offer unlimited paid vacations, and you are free to take a longer journey
once in a while, whitin reason. We do need to make sure that we continue a
sustainable and profitable company after all.


## How to apply

If you think this is you, send an application e-mail to [hiring@subvisual.com]
with your name, your portfolio with visual examples of what you have done in
the past, Github link and a cover letter explaining why you want to join us, as
well as describing a recent technology you like and why you like it. Provided
your application meets these criteria, we will be in touch.

Join us! We’ll love to have you!


[hiring@subvisual.com]: mailto:hiring@subvisual.com
